# melanoma_detection
<br> </br>
**Melanoma**, one of the most serious forms of skin cancer arises from melanocytes, which produce pigment. According to Cancer Research UK, melanoma has claimed 2,341 lives during 2017-2019 in United Kingdom. However, it is curable and has a survival rate of 87%. Histopathological analysis and biopsy are the main diagnostic methods to detect melanoma. Recent non-invasive cancer detection methods involving imaging pigmented skin lesion images sparked interests in deep learning community. This led to using convolutional neural networks (CNN) and Transformers to accelerate detection of melanoma which showed promising results. The existing CNN and Transformer models rely on convolution and attention modules to detect features and make decisions. These models have few drawbacks like complexity, long training hours and intensive computing resources usage (GPU-graphics processing unit and memory).
<br></br>
<br>To overcome these drawbacks, we have used an approach of multilayer perceptrons (MLP) based mixer architecture. To achieve this, an architecture known as MLP-mixer takes the input images as patches which are converted into a table like form and then fed to a mixer layer. The mixer layer contains 2 MLP blocks, the first one (token mixing) detects features in the image across patches viz. aggregates channels where the feature occurs. The second block looks for features in the patch and associates it with the channel. It also uses Layer Norm along with GELU (Gaussian Error Linear Unit) activations and skip connections. Using experimental settings for parameters like patch size, layers, MLP blocks and dropouts, this proposed model was built and trained on skin lesion images which were pre-processed to ensure uniform input. The best model developed from the experiment obtained binary classification accuracy, precision, recall and f1-score of 87.33%, 87.6%, 87.2% and 87.3% respectively on the HAM10000 dataset. The results were competitive to state-of-the-art (SOTA) CNN and Transformer models on melanoma detection. This concluded in a lightweight model which can be trained faster on economical computation resources and deployed into real-time applications. We hope the results will spark more interests to explore MLP architecture and their development. </br>
